---
title: "What even is a Web Framework anyway?"
draft: false
image: "../assets/webFrame.png"
createdAt: 11-11-2024
tags:
  - guide
description: "
  There's a bit of filler text that I've seen used a lot in website templates.
  Don't bother reading it, it's all gibberish, but here's a good snippet:
  Leverage agile frameworks to provide a robust synopsis for high level
  overviews. Iterative approaches to corporate strategy foster collaborative
  thinking to further the overall value proposition. Organically grow the
  holistic world view of disruptive innovation via workplace diversity and
  empowerment. Bring to the table win-win survival strategies to ensure
  proactive domination."
icon: "fa6-brands:node-js"
---

There's a bit of filler text that I've seen used a lot in website templates.
Don't bother reading it, it's all gibberish, but here's a good snippet:

<p style='font-size: small; line-height: 50%'>Leverage agile frameworks to provide a robust synopsis for high level overviews. <span style='font-size: smaller'>Iterative approaches to corporate strategy foster collaborative thinking to further the overall value proposition. <span style='font-size: smaller'>Organically grow the holistic world view of disruptive innovation via workplace diversity and empowerment. <span style='font-size: smaller'>Bring to the table win-win survival strategies to ensure proactive domination. <span style='font-size: smaller'>At the end of the day, going forward, a new normal that has evolved from generation X is on the runway heading towards a streamlined cloud solution. <span style='font-size: smaller'>User generated content in real-time will have multiple touchpoints for offshoring. Capitalize on low hanging fruit to identify a ballpark value added activity to beta test. Override the digital divide with additional clickthroughs from DevOps. Nanotechnology immersion along the information highway will close the loop on focusing solely on the bottom line.</span></span></span></span></span></p>

Your eyes glaze over after the first sentence, right? It's mind-numbing.
Deliberately so, I should add. It uses buzzwords that rely on context for
meaning, but doesn't provide any. Perfect filler text despite being 100%
grammatically correct. But that first sentence stuck with me because it's
shockingly close to how web frameworks market themselves.

They always try to paint themselves as the only product you'll need for web
development in a way that appeals to business types, but overwhelms anyone who
might be interested in actually _using_ it. Should we be worried that the most
powerful people in our society respond best to nonsense word salad that _eludes_
to something valuable? Probably, but that can't be solved with a blog post, so
instead I'll try to demystify some of the marketing-speak that surrounds
frameworks, JavaScript, and web development in general.

## But Seriously, What's a Framework?

At its most basic level, a framework is a collection of tools that developers
use to create and run software on a specific platform. A good example of this
that ironically has nothing to do with the internet is Microsoft's .NET
Framework. Funnily enough, Microsoft **also** had a hard time explaining what
.NET was or why you should want it. So much so that they
[stopped trying after 3 years](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_.NET_strategy).

In retrospect it's hard to see why Microsoft saw value in pushing .NET to the
consumer in the first place. Not only was it extremely confusing for those
without extensive knowledge of the Windows operating system, it was always meant
to be invisible to the end user. Any research on the topic quickly devolves into
labyrinthine link-trees and endless acronyms. .NET was Microsoft's
implementation of
[CLI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Language_Infrastructure), and
included an [FCL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framework_Class_Library) which
interacted with the [CLR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Language_Runtime)
to provide support for [ASP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASP.NET),
[WPF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Presentation_Foundation),
[WCF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Communication_Foundation), and
[LINQ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_Integrated_Query). Clear as mud.
.NET was an important development in the history of Windows (It's the main
reason Visual Studio and Windows XP even exist), but it was never going to be
the selling point Microsoft clearly wanted it to be.

Web Frameworks, on the other hand, are marketed **way** more. Probably because
there's a lot more of them and the web isn't nearly as monopolized as the PC
platform[^1]. Additionally, the web is a lot more versatile than a closed
platform like Windows. .NET's whole job was to take code, process it, and spit
out an application that would run the same way on every other system using .NET.
Web frameworks do the same thing, but for web browsers. When the web was still
primarily accessed through phone lines, there wasn't a need for frameworks. Why
bother making things more complicated when developers could comfortably type
HTML faster than connections could deliver it?

Frameworks became necessary after JavaScript fundamentally changed what web
pages were capable of. HTML and CSS are both markup languages, they're not
[Turing Complete](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_machine). Raw HTML is
functionally identical to a TXT file, it's just designed to be processed and
formatted before being presented to the end user. It doesn't "execute" like a
high-level programming language would, it's just a document. JavaScript can
manipulate that document dynamically by adding, removing, and changing sections
at runtime. An important term to remember here is
[DOM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Object_Model) (Document Object
Model). "Manipulating the DOM" is essentially shorthand for "change something in
the HTML without just editing the HTML directly".

## Why would I need a framework when JavaScript already does it all?

JavaScript functionality allows just about anything you can think of to be
turned into a web app. The downside? Vanilla JavaScript is a confusing mess to
work with. The language was allegedly thrown together in 10 days and is
notoriously bad when it comes to handling errors in consistent ways. Combine
that with [JIT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-in-time_compilation) (Just In
Time) compilation, and JavaScript code is nigh impossible to debug at scale. Web
Frameworks provide a layer of abstraction between a web app and a browser with
collections of functions and variables. Now you may be thinking "wait that just
sounds like a library", and if you aren't, congratulations! You're a minority!

There's a VERY gray area between framework and library, but my favorite
definition is libraries are things you build _**with**_, while frameworks are
things you build _**for**_. You can import jQuery into any old project, but to
use React functions, you're better off starting over from scratch. This model of
framework as a platform means people get very attached to specific frameworks,
as they're functionally new languages and require just as much experience to use
effectively. But before choosing a framework, there's an even more foundational
layer to web development you have to consider.

## Okay, I'll bite, what's a JavaScript Runtime?

Technically there's an even _more_ foundational layer called the JavaScript
**Engine**, but Google's [V8](https://v8.dev/) , Mozilla's
[SpiderMonkey](https://spidermonkey.dev/), and Apple's
[JavascriptCore](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/javascriptcore)[^?]
all operate close enough to each other that it's not worth considering for 99.9%
of people. The JavaScript **Runtime** refers to the whole environment your code
runs in. This includes the engine, web APIs, and an event loop[^2]. Here, things
start getting a little less centralized, as there are 3 runtimes with
significant support currently on the market.

### Node.js

The reigning champion and oldest of the 3. It's hard to pitch what makes Node
special because it's considered the default by every dev tool released
after 2010. Its biggest strength is compatibility. Its package manager, npm[^3],
is ubiquitous enough that a major selling point of the other 2 runtimes is
backwards-compatibility with npm. Node has had a lot of time to grow and mature,
but that also means it comes with a lot of baggage. The number of people using
the internet has more than doubled since Node was released, and the amount of
JavaScript in the median website has more than
[septupled](https://httparchive.org/reports/state-of-javascript#bytesJs)[^4].
That's the main reason the other 2 popular runtimes sell themselves as more
modern and performant alternatives to Node. That, and Node is _easily_ the
weakest when it comes to mascots, with their Rocket Turtle only being introduced
in February 2024. At that point, their brand identity was a green hexagon for
over a decade. No shade towards Rocket Turtle, but he isn't Node, and I doubt he
ever will be.

![Node's mascot, a turtle with an aviator hat and goggles, riding a rocket like a skateboard](../assets/node.js_mascot.png "Rad dude, probably too rad to be the face of such a monolithic pillar of the web")

### Bun

Bun is a JavaScript runtime, package manager, bundler, and tester with the main
goal of being a drop-in replacement for Node.js. Its selling point is simple:
speed. One look at their [website](https://bun.sh/) confirms this. They're
really proud of their benchmark scores and are not shy about sharing them. This
makes my job a lot easier, because what more do I need to say? There's no hidden
nuance here, you don't need any insight into web development to know that a
faster runtime is desirable. If you want speed and don't mind the hiccups that
come with using software that hit 1.0 in September 2023, Bun's the one.

![Bun's Logo, a steamed bun with round black eyes and an open, smiling mouth](../assets/bun-logo.svg "They do a lot of branding based around Bun as in Dumpling, and it works in the context of a JavaScript Bundler, but they occasionally reference Bun as an abbreviation for Bunny. That's the kind of flexibility you need to stand a chance against Node.")

### Deno

Have you ever looked at something you made and realized that trying to fix it
would take more work than starting over? Sunk-cost is a powerful deterrent, but
it didn't stop Ryan Dahl[^5] from leaving Node.js to try and de-node the web.
Hence the name and pronunciation of Deno, a JavaScript runtime looking to solve
3 big problems with Node: security, complexity, and web compatibility. Security
is a topic better suited for server admins and professionals, so let's focus on
the 2 you'll actually interact with.

![Image](../assets/heaviest-in-the-universe-node-modules.png "This one folder is probably the reason .gitignore even exists")

Node packages are just that, self-contained packages that are all Node projects
themselves. Any given Node project potentially has hundreds of `package.json`
files in them. This can lead to a lot of redundancy, especially when it comes to
dependency trees. Deno packages usually point to a single TypeScript file that
provides all necessary functionality. Not only does this reduce complexity, it
also highlights another problem with Node: It was never meant to run on the Web.

Node was originally designed as a generalized software solution for running
JavaScript code. To fit this specification, all dependencies had to be present
locally. This isn't necessary for servers, where it's assumed that a lot of your
website is hosted remotely. This network model means that each page can load
only what is needed, and skip any wasted work that may have come with loading
parts of Node modules that aren't necessary in a server setting. This web-first
design also means Deno supports standard web APIs, making remote loading even
more seamless.

That may have been more "pitching" than "explaining", but Deno's advantages
aren't nearly as easy to articulate as Node's decade+ of support and Bun's
Blazing Benchmarks. The bottom line is that Deno is a more modern alternative to
Node.js. It's the Vulkan to Node's OpenGL, the Wayland to Node's X11, so if
you're technically experienced enough to understand either of those analogies, I
recommend giving Deno a shot. Plus their mascot is easily the best: a cute
little sauropod chilling in the rain. A+, no notes.

![An image of a long-necked dinosaur with the word "DENO" next to it](../assets/dark-transparent.svg "It's even poking its little head around the code examples on their website. I like to imagine it's working in the server room, helping with the tall stacks")

## Glossary

Okay, after all that, let's take a second to review terms that will come in
handy when attempting to decode marketing-speak. All of these obviously have
different definitions outside of web development, but that kind of specificity
is for docs, not here.

**ENGINE**: A baseline abstraction layer for JavaScript, allowing it to run in a
browser.

**RUNTIME**: The environment JavaScript runs in, works closely with the engine
to connect your code to everything outside of itself.

**PACKAGE MANAGER**: Downloads and installs modules, but can be used outside of
Node.

**FRAMEWORK**: A larger module that you're expected to build on top of. Defines
the basic functionality of your webpage.

So, while your framework is the most flashy component of your JavaScript
webpage, you need to be aware of the more foundational parts of your tech-stack.
There are a LOT of frameworks out there, so take some time to consider how they
might integrate into the other tools you're using. Web development is a
collaborative process! When someone tries to sell their product as an all-in-one
solution, know they're really selling other people's work. Stay curious!

Signing off: Wheelsbot

~~_Always on that dang Computer_~~

[^?]:
    Yes, it's "JavascriptCore", not "JavaScriptCore". I don't like it any more
    than you do. This is like if Levi-oh-SAH was the correct pronunciation.

[^1]:
    But you can help
    [change that](https://www.wheelsbot.dev/posts/arch-linux-install-guide/)
    today!

[^2]:
    An [equally confusing](https://youtu.be/8aGhZQkoFbQ) subject, but for now
    let's just say it's the part of your browser responsible for keeping things
    consistent between you and the server.

[^3]: Which, rather un-creatively, stands for "node package manager"

[^4]:
    For those of you using your brains for more important things than
    remembering number prefixes, that's 7 times.

[^5]:
    Creator of Node.js and has a
    [Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ryan_Dahl) shorter than
    _this_ article. My guy just revolutionized the modern internet and then
    proceeded to use it as little as possible. King. Check out his
    [blog](https://tinyclouds.org/) if you can, it's nice to see a titan of
    modern web design with a blog that _anyone_ could make.
